---
layout: post
title: Astronautics Exam Problem
collection: phys
---
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inspired by a problem in Zangwill[^1], I came up with an exam problem based on it. Here is the original problem:

2.1 \[\textbf{Measuring B}\] 

Let \[\vec{F}\_{1}\] and \[\vec{F}\_{2}\] be the instantaneous forces that act on a particle with charge $q$ when it moves through a magnetic field $\vec{B}(\vec{r})$ with velocities $\vec{v}\_{1}$ and $\vec{v}\_{2}$, respectively. 

Without choosing a coordinate system, show that $\vec{B}(\vec{r})$ can be determined from the observables $\vec{v}\_{1} \times \vec{F}\_{1}$ and $\vec{v}\_{2} \times \vec{F}\_{2}$ if $\vec{v}\_{1}$ and $\vec{v}\_{2}$ are appropriately oriented.

Here is the problem I developed:
> You are an engineer for a fusion rocket company that is launching a mission to test their interstellar propulsion technology, and acquire valuable scientific data on the magnetic fields of outer space. 

> The system that will be performing this task consists of two autonomous probes, each equipped with an array of sensors for accurately measuring their trajectories'. Once immersed in the interstellar plasma, the probes will become charged, and begin to experience a Lorentz force.  

> (20 pts) (a)  By measuring their velocity, and acceleration, and maintaining a specific orientation with regard to each other while moving through a given region of space, the probes can obtain a reading for the steady magnetic field there, $\vec{B}(\vec{r})$. Derive this exact expression by algebraically combining and manipulating the observables that the probes obtain: $ \vec{v}\_{1},\vec{v}\_{2},\vec{F}\_{1},\vec{F}\_{2}$.   

> (10 pts) (b) What assumptions need to hold about the probes' characteristics and trajectories' for the expression you derived to be valid?

> (10 pts) (c) How would deviations in the probes' observables, e.g., an error in the accelerometer, or speedometer, effect the result?

> (10 pts) (d) Give some numbers, and ask them to calculate the steady magnetic field. Does it make sense? (is the divergence 0?)

There's a couple of places that I think the problem still needs work. One, obviously (d) needs numbers. Two, there's no guarantee that the magnetic field in space will be steady. More likely, it will be quasi-steady, with the amplitude of these fluctuations varying dependent on the state of the sun, or more generally, whichever star is driving the local dynamics. Based on this reason, I think this question would serve as a good second question for an exam where the first question is about calculating the conditions of the plasma at the specific location.  

[^1]: Zangwill, Andrew. “The Maxwell Equations.” Modern Electrodynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2012. 