---
layout: post
title: Benchmarking CUDA Binary Search
collection: gpu
---
### Introduction - GPUs vs CPUs
$\hspace{1cm}$ GPUs are becoming a popular topic in modern computing. AI trends have created commercial pressures which in turn have adapted these devices away from their heritage as the workhorse behind the latest and greatest video games, and towards that of a massively-parallel processor capable of blazingly fast feats of numerical calculation. The question must then be asked, just how fast are these feats, and how do they compare to the speed of a CPU?

$\hspace{1cm}$ Unfortunately, there is not a simple, cut-and-dry answer to this question. There is no mathematical theory that you can point to and say "given 'x', 'y', and 'z', the GPU will be 'N' times faster than a CPU". Amdahl's Law is an item from the field of parallel programming that attempts to do such a thing, but the truth is: it depends. First, like most things in computing, we have to be specific. What are we asking the hardware to do, i.e., what problem are we solving? Before continuing, there is a specific meaning to what a 'problem' is, that we must be on the same page about. Colloquially, one might characterize a problem as "something to be solved" (circular), or "a challenge" (begs the question), or perhaps in some other inexact way. When venturing into computer science, we must do away with these informal notions.  

$\hspace{1cm}$ Formally, a problem is an unknown mapping between a set of inputs, and a set of outputs. For a very simple example, consider a set of inputs consisting of the number $3$, and the desired output a set consisting of the number, $9$. The problem is how to transform the input, $3$, into the output, $9$. There are multiple ways to solve this, very simple problem. For example, the solution could be multiplying the input by $3$, or perhaps adding $6$ to it.

$\hspace{1cm}$ By specifying the mapping, i.e., by coming up with a sequence of steps that take the inputs and transform them into the outputs, we solve the problem. Such a sequence of steps is known as an $\textbf{algorithm}$. Algorithms are at the heart of computer science. There are many different kinds, and they are frequently classified according to their association with a given $\textbf{data structure}$, which is another topic at the heart of computer science. Just like algorithms are a way of specifying the transformation of data from one form to another, data structures are a way of giving structure to a collection of data. 

$\hspace{1cm}$ A popular example of a data structure is that of a $\textbf{binary tree}$. 

### Binary Search - The Fastest Search Algorithm Around


### CUDA Binary Search

### GTX 960 vs. i5-10400F

### RTX 2060 vs i5-10400F

### Conclusion