---
layout: post
title: The Physics of Weightlifting - Tonnage
collection: phys
---

### Progressive Overload
Why am I starting a post about "Tonnage" (whatever that is) by talking about "Progressive Overload"? Because, the two are entangled. Progressive overload is the first principle of a successful strength program. Every successful strength training program will implement it. That is a strong statement, but it is true. Why?

Why? Because, strength is an adaptation. Progressive overload describes the process of doing more the next workout, than you did the previous one. Without this, there will be no reason for your body to grow stronger, because there will be no stimulus that requires it. So, what does tonnage have to do with this?

Tonnage, in essence, is a measure of how much work you did to perform a given exercise. As we will see, comparing the tonnages between exercise A, and exercise B, is like comparing apples to oranges. It just doesn't make sense. Let's take a step back, and ask ourselves, what IS the work that one does during a given exercise?

### Mechanical Work
Drilled into every physics student's brain is the formula $W = \vec{F}\cdot\vec{x}$. This is the amount of energy associated with a force, $\vec{F}$, moving a particle through a displacement, $\vec{x}$. 

The idea of a "particle" is an abstract one. If you asked a physicist what a particle is, depending on what kind of physicist they are, they would probably begin talking about the Standard Model (if they were a particle physicist), or perhaps start talking about whatever quasiparticle is relevant to their field (don't worry about what a quasiparticle is). A quasiparticle is a disturbance in a medium that collectively acts like a single particle.

textit{Jesus christ}, you might be thinking. \textit{What is this guy even talking about?} I'm talking about barbells, of course. 

### Barbells
You can think of a barbell as a quasiparticle. When you apply a force on the load that describes the barbell, it moves. What is this, but a collective behavior of the group of particles constituting the extended, mechanical body of the barbell? As you move the barbell, it acts like a single particle of mass $m$, located at the center of mass of the extended body, subject to the dynamics that the normal force that your own extended body is exerting on it. 

To be sure, there are second-order effects associated with this motion that we must not neglect out of hand. For example, if the barbell rotates during, say, a squat, this is undesirable behavior as it creates an imbalance that your body will respond to. When lifting, we do not want our body responding to imbalances, because they only create more imbalances, this time in the form of our anatomy, which will eventually propagate into our kinesiology if left unchecked.
