---
layout: post
title: Modelling a Plasma as a Fluid
collection: phys
---
### A Philosophical Aside About Particles
Anthropology is a living field, but to the best of the author's knowledge at the current moment, the first records of a rational investigation into the nature of reality comes from the Greek city-state of Athens. The Greeks, who knew nothing of algebra, calculus, or differential equations, knew of paper as a scarce resource that was imported from Egypt, largely followed a metaphysics that considered pure reason as the only valid epistemological mode, and communicated most of their mathematics by drawing in dirt or sand, were timeless geometers, but poor physicists. Nevertheless, many physicists, and historians of science, account this as the beginning of the field of the physics for two main reasons:

(1) Because they technically discovered electromagnetism

(2) Because one of them pioneered particle physics

The first represents one of the few notable pieces of experimental work that come from the Grecian school. The work was done by Thales of Miletus, who observed that rubbing a chunk of amber, a.k.a, *elektron*, on a span of sheep's wool or animal fur will then cause small, lightweight, linear objects, such as a feather, to be attracted to the chunk of material. The Athenians did not understand what it was that they had discovered, however, and made many confused attempts to try and explain the phenonmenona they observed. In the present day, we know that rubbing the amber on the wool produced an excess of charge on the amber, thereby creating an electric field in the nearby space. Nor did they understand that holding this charge distribution near a feather would cause electrons in it to be repulsed to one end of the length, leaving an accumulation of positive charge at the other, thereby creating an electric dipole that would experience a torque leading to mechanical motion of the bulk object.  

The second represents a remarkable idea that a philosopher by the name of Democritus introduced when he stated that nature is fundamentally composed of an indivisible substance which was termed *atomos*. The basis for this primitive version of particle physics is the argument that if you keep dividing the matter that constitutes existence, then at some point you must reach a point where you cannot divide it any further, or else there would be nothing that you could say supports existence. As far as we can tell from the vantage of modern physics, this idea is fundamentally correct, although with our sophisticated instrumentation and mathematical tools we know the *atomos* is actually a zoo of particles, or perhaps an ensemble of strings, depending on who you ask. 

### What Does Plasma Physics Care?
If that equivocation makes you sigh, I understand. Like so much of modern quantum mechanics, when it does not focus on calculating the manifold interactions between the different species of particles, as in a collider, or on the evolution, and error-correction, of a qubit's state, as in a quantum computer, it largely boils down to a philosophical debate, which can become tiresome.

Leaving such things aside, we can turn to a much more interesting, and powerful, field of physics, namely, that of plasma physics. Plasma physics is something of the bastard step-child of physics. Many fundamental physicists do not even consider plasma physics as its own separate field, but rather a mixture of statistical mechanics and electromagnetism whose main purpose is being applied to relevant engineering systems, or being utilized by astrophysicists. Nevertheless, the vast majority of the ordinary matter in the universe exists in the plasma state, and plasmas frequently serve as the basis for amazing technological innovations, such as the fully-ionized plasmas found in the nuclear fusion reactors that are going to power humanity's future, or the partially-ionized plasmas used to fabricate the silicon wafers which become the computer chips that are the backbone of the modern economy. 

