---
layout: post
title: High-Performance Ideal Magnetohydrodynamics Plasma Simulation
collection: hpc
---
### Introduction
$\hspace{1cm}$ In this article, I will describe how to implement a simulation of a fluid plasma based on the Ideal Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) model that can achieve performance on modern retail hardware which eclipses the Cray-1 (1976), one of the most successful supercomputers ever sold, on data volumes as large as 31 GB, which was as much as I could fit in 64 GB of RAM while keeping the basic number of elements to a power-of-two (the operation of my workstation is associated with about 8 GB of overhead).

$\hspace{1cm}$ Arguably, the performance of the algorithm is commensurate with the Cray-2 (1982), however, the code I am about to describe is a sequential code and the Cray-2 was a quadcore processor capable of ~800 MFlops, so there is not an exact mapping between the two. 

$\hspace{1cm}$ To follow this tutorial in scientific computing, which, strictly-speaking, is an advanced discipline of computer science, you will need to have some background in mathematics, and some ability to program. There will $\textbf{not}$ be a demand to solve complicated integrals, but being a scientific code that solves physical equations it does involve numerical analysis, which can be heavy on the brain. 

$\hspace{1cm}$ The intention is to build everything from the ground floor up, and provide a step-by-step process to guide you through every part of the project. The first step is to talk about the choice of language.

### C++: A High-Performance Compromise
$\hspace{1cm}$ The original version of the code was done in C++. Why C++? Let me explain briefly. If you were to take every programming language and measure which is the most $\textit{powerful}$, in the purely physical sense of which gives you the most bang for your buck \(the electricity running the computer\), the winner would be C. Every programmer worth their salt needs to have written C at some point, just like every individual who wants to call themselves an engineer needs to have studied calculus. 

$\hspace{1cm}$ However, not every programmer worth their salt needs to keep writing C once they've been exposed to it. Put simply, C requires the programmer to do the heavy lifting--all of it. Sometimes this is the right approach, like if you're writing an operating system, but other times it is not. For example, in Python, if you wanted to write a program that generated a QR code that you could send to your friend which displayed a digital birthday card when they scanned it, the project would be only a handful of lines. These lines would consist of `import` statements that loaded libraries which have modules to generate the QR code, attach the data you've specified as representing the birthday card to it, and then send it to your friend, as well as the statements instantiating this functionality.

If, for some unknown reason, you wanted to implement this project in C, then the resulting code would be quite different. You would need to handle all of the details yourself. There would be no importing the libraries that implement the functionality you need. You would have to write them yourself, or scour the web in the hopes that someone has already completed the task, and you only need to provide the birthday card (after managing to link everything together, of course). The takeaway here is: before you do something, see if someone else has done it first.

This takeaway is relevant, because it describes why--nominally--one should choose C++ for this project. Put simply, C++ is a compromise between the power of C, and the convenience of a high-level language like Python. At the cost of some abstractions which mask them (and reduce our performance slightly), we get access to the powerful, low-level C code without having to deal with or write it directly. Of course, you can choose to write the software in whatever language you'd like, but whatever choice you make, I recommend writing it in C++ as well. If for no other reason than to compare the performance. 

Not to belabor the point, but I want to illustrate it concretely, and change the subject back to scientific computing in the process, by comparing what it would take to implement a Matrix data structure in C, vs. what it would take in C++. Finally, I'd also like to make a brief statement about the compiler, and what's going on under the hood when you run a program.

### Tensors: The Mathematical Objects Behind Everything
<!-- Illustrate this point by comparing the code required to implement and work with a matrix (rank-2 tensor) in C vs. C++. -->
Tensors are the basis for many scientific and engineering calculations. Numerical routines can be classified as either $\textbf{explicit}$, or $\textbf{implicit}$, depending on how they update the simulation. $\textbf{Explicit} routines advance the values directly at each timestep, e.g., the Lax-Wendroff scheme that will be used in this tutorial to implement the equations of Ideal Magnetohydrodynamics in 3D,

$$
Q^{n+1}_{ijk} = \frac{Q^{n}_{ijk} + \bar{Q}_{ijk}}{2} - \frac{\Delta t}{2\Delta x}\left(\bar{F}_{i+1,jk} - \bar{F}_{ijk}\right) - \frac{\Delta t}{2\Delta y}\left(\bar{G}_{i,j+1,k} - \bar{G}_{ijk}\right) - \frac{\Delta t}{2\Delta z}\left(\bar{H}_{ij,k+1} - \bar{H}_{ijk}\right)
$$

$\hspace{1cm}$ If the above looks unapproachable to you, do not worry. It is simply describing what the state variables of the fluid system, in this case Ideal MHD, \[Q_{ijk}^{n}\], should be computed to be at each new timestep, \[Q_{ijk}^{n+1}\], based on the quantities on the right-hand side (RHS). These RHS quantities are a mixture of parameters related to the spatial: $(\Delta x, \Delta y, \Delta z)$, and temporal: $\Delta t$, discretization, the fluxes of the fluid variables in 3D-space: $(F_{ijk},G_{ijk},H_{ijk})$, and then also a set of intermediate variables and fluxes that are needed by the algorithm: $\bar{Q}_{ijk}^{n}$, $\bar{F}\_{ijk}$, $\bar{G}\_{ijk}$, $\bar{H}\_{ijk}$. 

$\hspace{1cm}$ Since this is a three-dimensional algorithm that discretizes Cartesian space, we need to store the data in a set of data cubes (rank-3 tensors). As a consequence, we need three indices in order to locate where each piece of data is in the domain. The full specification of these quantities will be described in the [Lax-Wendroff section](#the-lax-wendroff-algorithm). 

$\textbf{Implicit}$ routines, on the other hand, update the state of the simulation by solving a system of equations that describes its evolution. One example of this is the numerical solution of Poisson's equation from electrostatics,

$$
\nabla^{2}\phi = -\frac{\rho(\vec{r})}{\epsilon_{0}}
$$

By discretizing the Laplacian, $\nabla^{2} = \pdv{}{2}{x} + \pdv{}{2}{y} + \pdv{}{2}{z}$, we can write it as a matrix, $\textbf{A}$, that acts upon a vector which represents the discretized potential, $\phi$, and produces the discretized charge density, $\rho$,

$$
\textbf{A}\phi = \rho
$$

If $\rho$ is specified initially and does not depend on time, then the above is sufficient to solve for the steady-state value of $\phi$. If, on the other hand, $\rho$ depends on time, e.g., [in a PIC simulation](1d1v#solving-poissons-equation-in-1d-with-periodic-boundary-conditions), then we must solve this system of equations at every timestep as a means of computing the new electrostatic potential. 

### Matrices: Implementing a Rank-2 Tensor 
Even though this application needs an [implementation of a rank-3 tensor](#implementing-a-rank-3-tensor), it is valuable and instructive to first look at the implementation of a matrix (rank-2 tensor). $\hspace{1cm}$ Here is what that looks like in C++:
```
#ifndef MATRIX_H
#define MATRIX_H

#include <cstddef>
#include <vector>

class Matrix{
    public:
        Matrix(size_t M, size_t N): num_rows_(M), num_cols_(N), storage_(M * N, 0.0) {}

        // Row-Major order
        double& operator()(size_t i, size_t j) { return storage_[num_cols_ * i + j]; }
        const double& operator()(size_t i , size_t j) const { return storage_[num_cols_ * i + j]; }

        const size_t num_rows() const { return num_rows_; }
        const size_t num_cols() const { return num_cols_; }

    private:
        size_t num_rows_, num_cols_;
        std::vector<double> storage_;
};
#endif
```

$\hspace{1cm}$ And here is what it looks like in C:

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

Matrix createMatrix(int, int);
void freeMatrix(Matrix), setElement(Matrix, int, int, double);
double getElement(Matrix, int, int);

typedef struct {
    int num_rows;
    int num_cols;
    double **data; // 2D array of doubles
} Matrix;

// Column-Major order
Matrix createMatrix(int num_rows, int num_cols) {
    Matrix mat;
    mat.num_rows = num_rows;
    mat.num_cols = num_cols;

    // Allocate a row of double *
    mat.data = (double **)malloc(num_rows * sizeof(double *));
    
    for (int i = 0; i < num_rows; i++) { // allocate the columns
        mat.data[i] = (double *)malloc(num_cols * sizeof(double));
    }

    return mat;
}

void freeMatrix(Matrix mat) {
    for (int i = 0; i < mat.num_rows; i++) {
        free(mat.data[i]);
    }
    free(mat.data);
}

void setElement(Matrix mat, int row, int col, double value) {
    if (row >= 0 && row < mat.num_rows && col >= 0 && col < mat.num_cols ) {
        mat.data[row][col] = value;
    }
}

double getElement(Matrix mat, int row, int col) {
    if (row >= 0 && row < mat.num_rows && col >= 0 && col < mat.num_cols ) {
        return mat.data[row][col];
    }
}
``` 
$\hspace{1cm}$ The above blocks of code are essentially equivalent with regards to what they implement. An entire post could probably be written just breaking down and analyzing the differences between the two languages, and their consequences for a project, but I will be brief here. For starters: observe how much more work we have to do with the C implementation, and not just to write it, but also just to <i> work with it </i>. For example, every time we want read or write to the data structure, we have to call the correct function that enables us to do so. Not only is this cumbersome, it also makes the code less readable. When we think of a particular element in a matrix it's something along the lines of an expression like,

$$
A(i,j) = A_{ij}
$$

Instead of this intuitive representation of the data when reading or writing the C implementation, we will be faced with a slew of `setElement(A, i, j)` and `getElement(A, i, j)`. Not only is this unintuituve and overly-verbose, there's also more room for error. As they're written, these functions are not safe. What happens if we try to read or write data outside the bounds of the data structures expanse in memory? The answer is that we will get a segfault, i.e., the process will be trying to access memory that it's not allowed to. In a small, demo program where we are just playing around with the data structure this might not be a big deal, but in a large production code where potentially trillions of lines of arithmetic are being processed that represent complex mathematical structures and physics, it can be a real nightmare. 

$\hspace{1cm}$ So, why is C like this? Fundamentally, it's because the language requires the programmer to do the heavy lifting, and manage the memory manually. This characteristic of C should not be understated, in fact it is fair to say that it is <i> the </i> defining characteristic of the language. That's why C is the language of choice for so much of the systems software that forms the basis for the modern, digital world. That's also why it can stay there while we use C++ to write scientific codes--except, of course, when something needs to run <i> really </i> fast, then it's worth the effort :\).  

In contrast, let's take a look at the C++ code again:
```
#ifndef MATRIX_H
#define MATRIX_H

#include <cstddef>
#include <vector>

class Matrix{
    public:
        Matrix(size_t M, size_t N): num_rows_(M), num_cols_(N), storage_(M * N, 0.0) {}

        // Row-Major order
        double& operator()(size_t i, size_t j) { return storage_[num_cols_ * i + j]; }
        const double& operator()(size_t i , size_t j) const { return storage_[num_cols_ * i + j]; }

        const size_t num_rows() const { return num_rows_; }
        const size_t num_cols() const { return num_cols_; }

    private:
        size_t num_rows_, num_cols_;
        std::vector<double> storage_;
};
#endif
```


### CPU Architecture: A Brief Overview
<!-- The source code for this project [has a permanent home on Github][1]. However, currently, this repository is mostly empty as I am in the process of moving the code over from the [original repository where the codebase is located][2], and also fixing a bug in the boundary conditions. This kind of error is surely a barrier to being able to perform computational science with the code, but this software is only a school project, and more to the point it does not effect the speed of the compute kernel, for reasons that will be explained when we get there. Let's begin. -->

### The Ideal MHD Model

### The Lax-Wendroff Algorithm

### Implementing a Rank-3 Tensor

[1]: https://github.com/russellmatt66/imhd-HPC
[2]: https://russellmatt66.github.io/hpc/1d1v