---
layout: post
title: A Primer on Plasma Pinches
collection: fusion
---
CFD, or Computational Fluid Dynamics, as the joke goes, actually stands for "Colors For Directors". Jokes aside, what differentiates a pretty picture of a cylinder from a serious work of scientific computing that adds value to an engineering team, is an understanding of the physics being represented by the visualization, and their importance. This colorful cylinder represents the initial state of the axial current density for a kind of magnetic confinement fusion (MCF) configuration known as a "screw-pinch".

Screw-pinches require arrays of superconducting magnets to produce the magnetic fields which confine the fusion plasma for a long enough timescale that more power can be obtained, for example by heating water to create steam that then drives a turbine, than was required to initiate the system, for example, the current and voltage that went into breaking the plasma down, and supporting any external control protocols. 

These kinds of magnets are expensive, sensitive, need to be cooled to very low temperatures, and require teams of brilliant, highly-skilled, scientists and engineers to install, maintain, develop, and implement the various moving parts that are required to operate these arrays of superconducting coils. This represents significant cost, and engineering complexity, and is one of the main challenges that the fusion community faces in producing a reactor that serves as the backbone of an electrical power grid.  

However, there is an alternative MCF configuration which produces the confinement field based instead on the fusion plasma current, and therefore does not require an external array of superconducting magnets, nor their expense. This is known as a "Z-pinch", called as such because the plasma current flows down the cylindrical axis (the z-direction), and creates a magnetic field which wraps around the plasma and compresses it radially ("pinches" it). 

When the UK, Soviet Union, and US, declassified their fusion programs in the 50s, it was the simplicity of this idea that led scientists to believe they would have a fusion-powered power plant within a decade. Unfortunately, Z-pinches are plagued by natural instabilities which cause any perturbation in the magnetic field structure to create a positive feedback loop that ends in the decoherence of the fusion plasma on a timescale that is too short to be practical. 

By the 80s, the fusion community had largely abandoned the Z-pinch because of this. Decades of searching for a way of stabilizing the device had only produced two approaches: (1) Use external magnetic fields (2) Locate the wall close enough to the plasma so that currents induced in the wall by the growth of an instability generate a stabilizing magnetic field in return. 

The problem with this second approach, and one of the other primary challenges that the fusion community faces, is that the intense flux of heat, and material, coming off of the fusion plasma causes the container walls to melt. Placing the walls of the device closer to the fusion plasma only makes this worse, so wall stabilization does not serve as a practical solution to stabilizing the Z-pinch. Does one even exist? 

As it turns out, the answer is yes! Ironically, it only took a decade after the community had moved on from the Z-pinch for a plasma scientist by the name of Uri Shumlak to propose a practical method for stabilizing one. This approach, coined "shear-flow stabilization", and the basis for the Shear-Flow Stabilized (SFS) Z-pinch being developed at Zap Energy, uses a radial shear in the axial plasma velocity to cause the phase of the perturbations to mix, and destructively interfere, in a way that allows the overall fusion plasma to remain stable for thousands of cycles of the magnetic field. In exchange for using its self-generated field to confine the plasma, the SFS Z-pinch does away with the expensive problem of superconductors altogether, at the cost of requiring a pulsed power system which is capable of generating over a Mega-Ampere (MA) of current (= 1,000,000 Amperes = A LOT), at a rate of around 10 times per second, in order to reach breakeven.         

Why am I telling you about the SFS Z-pinch if what I'm showing is a different configuration altogether? Besides the fact that the SFS Z-pinch is potentially one of the most exciting, and powerful, innovations to have happened in technology, it also requires a HUGE amount of current when pulsing the device. The Kruskal-Shafranov limit is a piece of plasma physics which describes a limitation on the amount of current a given fusion plasma can support stably. Fortunately, the SFS Z-pinch does not appear to need more current than the KS limit permits, but the purpose of this screw-pinch simulation is two-fold: (1) Demonstrate the Kruskal-Shafranov limit computationally (2) Develop a performant GPU simulation of the system using NVIDIA hardware.
